Prometheus is known as a pull system rather than a push system.
That means, that it knows about the data sources and pulls in their time-series data.
A push system, on the other hand,
does not know anything about its data sources until they send something.
I prefer push systems for the simple reason that
it's easier to know when a data source goes down.
However, most of the differences between
push and pull systems are not really significant enough to worry about.
Data is pulled from various data sources using light-weight agents called
exporters that are installed on or attached to data sources themselves.
Data is pulled or scraped,
as they say, from exporters every few seconds.
Exporters are not hard to build,
but there are a lot of pre-build exporters available for most of the popular systems.